I'm Lester Holt anchor of NBC nightly news I want to welcome you to the first presidential debate. The participants tonight are Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. This debate is sponsored by the commission on presidential debates, a nonpartisan nonprofit organization. The commission drafted tonight format and the rules have been agreed to by the campaigns. The ninety minute debate is divided into six segments, each fifteen minutes long. We will explore two three topic areas tonight achieving prosperity, America’s direction and securing America. At the start of each segment I will ask the same leadoff question to both candidates and they will each have up to two minutes to respond. From that point until the end of the segment, we will have an open discussion. The questions are mine and not been shared with the commission or the campaigns. The audience here in the room has agreed to remain silent so that we can focus on what the candidates are saying. I will invite you to applaud however at this moment as we welcome the candidates. Democratic nominee for President of the United States Hillary Clinton and Republican nominee for president of the United States Donald J. Trump.

While I don't expect this to cover all the issues of this campaign tonight but I remind everyone there are two more presidential debates scheduled. We are going to focus on many of the issues that voters tell us are most important and we’re going to press for specifics. I am honored to have this role but this evening belongs to the candidates and just as important to the American people. Candidates we look forward to hearing you articulate your policies and your positions as well as your visions and your values. So, let's begin. We’re calling this opening segment achieving prosperity and central to that is jobs. There are two economic realities in America today. There's been a record six straight years of job growth and new census numbers show incomes have increased at a record rate after years of stagnation. However, income inequality remains significant. And nearly half of Americans living paycheck to paycheck. Beginning with you, Secretary Clinton - why are you a better choice than your opponent to create the kinds of jobs that will put more money into the pockets of American workers?

Secretary Clinton, thank you. Mr. Trump the same question to you. It's about putting money, more money into the pockets of American workers. You have up to two minutes.

Secretary Clinton, would you like to respond?

Let me follow up message up if I can. You talk about creating five million jobs and promised to bring back millions of jobs for Americans. How are you going to bring back the industries that have led to this country for cheaper labor overseas? How specifically are you going to tell American manufacturers that you have to come back?

Let me interrupt for just a moment.

Back to the question, though, how do you bring back, specifically bring back jobs, American manufacturers how do you make them bring the jobs back?

Let me let Secretary Clinton get in here.

and would, in some instances, disadvantage middle-class families compared to the wealthy, were to go into effect, we would lose three and a half million jobs. And maybe have another recession. They’ve looked at my plans, and they’ve said okay, if we can do this, and I intend to get it done, we will have ten million more new jobs. Because we will be making investments where we can grow the economy. Take clean energy. Some country is going to be the clean energy superpower of the twenty first century. Donald thinks that climate change is a hoax perpetrated by the Chinese. I think it's real.

Mr. Trump.

Very quickly…

Folks, were going to --

Let me get you to pause right there, because we’re going to move into the...

Please take thirty seconds.

DONALD TRUMP	And take a look at mine also and you’ll see..

Well, you just opened the next segment.

The next segment, we’re continuing the subject….

But,

You are unpacking a lot here. And we’re still on the issue of achieving prosperity. And I want to talk about taxes. The fundamental difference between you two concerns the wealthy. Secretary Clinton, you’re calling for a tax increase on the wealthiest Americans. I’d like you to further defend that. And Mr. Trump, you’re calling for tax cuts for the wealthy and I’d like you to defend that. The next two minute answer goes to you, Mr. Trump.

All right, you have two minutes of the same question to defend tax increases on the wealthiest Americans, Secretary Clinton.

This is Secretary Clinton’s two minutes please.

Sir, this is Secretary Clinton’s two minutes.

is what we need in America not more advantages for people at the very top.

Mr. Trump --

Mr. Trump, we're talking about the burden that Americans have to pay, yet you have not released your tax returns. And the reason nominees have released their returns for decades is that voters will know if their potential president owes money to -- who you know owes it to, and any business conflicts. Don't have Americans have a right to know there are any conflicts of interest?

The IRS has an audit	DONALD TRUMP	Excuse me	LESTER HOLT	of your taxes. You're perfectly free to release your taxes during an audit. And so the question does the public’s right to know outweigh your personal...

So it's negotiable?

I will let her answer that. But let me just admonish the audience one more time. There was an agreement. We did ask you to be silent so it would be helpful for us. Secretary Clinton?

He also raised the issue of your e-mails. Do you want to respond to that?

Mr. Trump?

Well, we’re well behind schedule so I want to move to our next segment. We move into our next segment talking about America's direction. Let's start by talking about race. The share of Americans who say race relations are bad in this country is the highest it's been in decades. Much of it amplified it by shootings of African-Americans by police, as we have seen recently in Charlotte and Tulsa. Race has been a big issue in this campaign and one of you is going to have to bridge a very wide and bitter gap. So how do you heal the divide? Secretary Clinton - you get two minutes on this.  

Ok Mr. Trump, you have two minutes, how to heal the divide?

Your two minutes have expired but I do want to follow up. Stop and Frisk was ruled unconstitutional in New York because it largely singled out black and Hispanic young men.

The argument is that it’s a form of racial profiling.

Secretary Clinton.

Secretary Clinton.

Secretary Clinton last week you said we’ve got to do everything possible to improve policing to go right at implicit bias. Do you believe that police are implicitly biased against black people?

DONALD TRUMP	I'd like to respond.

Please.

This conversation is about race and so Mr. Trump, I have to ask you….

Please, please respond.

Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump for five years you perpetuated a false claim of the nation's first black president was not a natural-born citizen. You questioned his legitimacy. In last couple weeks you acknowledge what most Americans have accepted for years, the president was born in the United States. Can you tell us what took you so long?

That was in 2011.

I will let you respond, that’s important. But I just want to get the answer here. The birth certificate was produced in 2011, you continued to tell the story and question the president's legitimacy in 2012, 13, 14, 15, as recently as January. So the question is, what changed your mind?

I'm sorry. I’m just going to follow up. I will let you respond because there is a lot there. We're talking about racial healing in the segment. What do you say to Americans --

Secretary Clinton.

Mr. Trump, you can respond then we’re going to move on in a second.

 Now as far as the lawsuit, yes, when I was very young, I went to my father's company. Had a real estate company in Brooklyn and Queens. And we, along with many, many other companies throughout the country, a federal lawsuit, were sued. We settled the suit with zero -- with no admission of guilt. It was very easy to do. But they sued many people. I notice you bring that up a lot, and, you know, I also noticed the very nasty commercials that you do on me in so many different ways, which I don’t do on you. Maybe I’m trying to save the money. But frankly, I look at that, and I say -- isn’t that amazing? Because I settled that lawsuit with no admission of guilt. But that was a lawsuit brought against many real estate firms. And it’s just one of those things. I'll go on one step further. In Palm Beach, Florida -- tough community -- a brilliant community, a wealthy community, probably the wealthiest community there is in the world, I opened a club. And really got great credit for it. No discrimination against African-Americans, against Muslims, against anybody. And it's a tremendously successful club. And I'm so glad I did it. And I have been given great credit for what I did. And I'm very, very proud of it. And that's the way I feel. That is the true way I feel.

Our next segment is called securing America. And we want to start with a twenty first century war happening every day in this country. Our institutions are under cyber attack, and our secrets are being stolen. So my question is, who's behind it? And how do we fight it? Secretary Clinton, this answer goes to you.

Your two minutes have expired.

Mr. Trump you have two minutes of the same question -- who’s behind it and how do we fight it?

Secretary Clinton?

You mention ISIS and we think of ISIS as over there. But there are American citizens who have been inspired to commit acts of terror on American soil. The latest incident, of course, the bombings we just saw in New York and New Jersey, the knife attack at a mall in Minnesota in the last year, deadly attacks in San Bernardino and Orlando. I’ll ask this to both of you. Tell us specifically how you prevent homegrown attacks by American citizens. Mr. Trump.

Secretary Clinton.

Mr.  --

Please respond.

Mr. Trump a lot of these are judgment questions. You had supported the war in iraq before the invasion.

My question is, since you supported it, why is your judgment….

The record shows otherwise.

Why is your judgment better than…

My reference was to what you said in 2002. My question was why is your judgment any different than Mrs.Clinton's?

Secretary Clinton?

We need to move on.

Our last -  

Which leads my next question as we enter our last segment here, still on the subject of securing America on nuclear weapons President Obama reportedly considered changing the nation's long-standing policy on first use. Do you support the current policy Mr. Trump you have two minutes on that.

Mrs. Clinton, Secretary Clinton, you have two minutes.

Your two minutes is...

Is expired.

One very quickly.

Mr. Trump.

You have just a...

Just a few final questions.

Mr. Trump, Secretary Clinton became in the first woman nominated for president by a major party earlier this month. You said quote she doesn’t have a presidential look. She's standing here right now. What you mean by that?

The quote was, “I just don’t think she has a presidential look…”

Let’s let her respond.

We are at the -- rear of the final question.

Mr. Trump are going to take ten seconds and then we’re going to have a final question.

One of you will not win this election. So my final question to you tonight are you willing to accept the outcome as the will of the voters Secretary Clinton.

Mr. Trump very quickly. Same question. Will you accept the outcome of the election as the will of the voters?

Will you accept the outcome of the election?

All right well that is going to do it for us. That concludes our debate for this evening - a spirited one. We covered a lot of ground, not everything as I suspected we would. The next presidential debates are scheduled for October ninth and Washington University in St. Louis and October nineteen at the University of Nevada Las Vegas. The conversation will continue. A reminder, the vice presidential debate is scheduled for October fourth at Longwood University in Farmville Virginia. My thanks to Hillary Clinton and to Donald Trump and to Hofstra University for hosting us tonight. Good night everyone.